MM-52754: Publish new schema migration guidelines (#1247)
mattermost/mattermost-developer-documentation: site/content/contribute/more-info/server/schema-migration-guide.md

  - /contribute/server/schema-migration-guide
---

## Overview

This document aims to do an analysis of the types of schema migrations we do in Mattermost and ways to make them non-blocking so as to improve the Mattermost upgrade experience.
Historically, we have never put a lot of thought to the migration process. Developers would simply add a DDL statement and call it a day. But that causes a significant impact to large customers for whom downtime is not an option. This causes them to push back on upgrading their Mattermost version for a long time (sometimes for several years). This in turn, has some cascading effects like customers not able to get new features, performance improvements etc.

We want to improve the situation and make upgrades a worry-free experience for our customers. It definitely comes at a cost of writing more code and delaying some features to avoid breaking changes. This document will aim to uncover all those cases and provide best practices to follow so that we can hit the right balance.

## Goals

We have two overarching goals and a third auxiliary goal.

> 1. Schema migrations should **ALWAYS** be backwards compatible till the last ESR.

Author: No, the last ESR from the version the migration is being introduced.

UPDATE - 19
DELETE - 2
```

![Migrations distribution](/contribute/more-info/server/migrations_pie.png)

We will go through each of these migration types and discuss how we can make it non-blocking. This is a lengthy document, so for those wanting to directly look at the executive summary, we present it right now. And then expand on each section in detail later.

### Conclusions

**MySQL 5.7**

| Operation      | Table rewrite | Concurrent DML allowed |
| -----------    | ------------- | ---------------------- |
| CREATE INDEX   | NO<sup>1</sup>| YES (with limitations)<sup>1</sup>|
| DROP INDEX     | NO            | YES                    |
| ADD COLUMN     | YES           | YES<sup>2</sup>                   |
| ALTER COLUMN   | YES           | NO                     |
| DROP COLUMN    | YES           | YES                    |
| ADD FK CONSTRAINT| NO          | NO (avoidable)<sup>3</sup>        |
| ADD UNIQUE CONSTRAINT | NO     | YES                    |

Note:
1. Fulltext and spatial indexes take locks. Adding a fulltext index can also rewrite the table if there is no user-defined FTS_DOC_ID column, or in other words if a fulltext index is being added for the first time.

> 2. Concurrent DML is also not permitted while adding an auto-increment column. However we don’t use it and are unlikely to use it in future. So I have made the cell green for now.

Author: I realized there is no "green" color here :) Since this was copied from the google doc. Removed the last sentence.

3. Setting `foreign_key_checks` to false avoids table locks. But it also defeats the purpose of a foreign key.

> **MySQL 8**

Reviewer: On a editorial note, shall we use a single table for mysql? The only difference is at adding column we can add the exception for that in the footnote like others.

Author: Sure

| Operation      | Table rewrite | Concurrent DML allowed |
| -----------    | ------------- | ---------------------- |
| CREATE INDEX   | NO<sup>1</sup>| YES (with limitations)<sup>1</sup>|
| DROP INDEX     | NO            | YES                    |
| ADD COLUMN     | NO (only in certain cases) <sup>2</sup>           | YES<sup>3</sup>                   |
| ALTER COLUMN   | YES           | NO                     |
| DROP COLUMN    | YES           | YES                    |
| ADD FK CONSTRAINT| NO          | NO (avoidable)<sup>4</sup>        |
| ADD UNIQUE CONSTRAINT | NO     | YES                    |

Note:
1. Fulltext and spatial indexes take locks. Adding a fulltext index can also rewrite the table if there is no user-defined FTS_DOC_ID column, or in other words if a fulltext index is being added for the first time.
2. Table rewrite happens if the column is being added to a table with a fulltext index. Which means this will affect adding columns to the Posts or the Channels table for example.

> 3. Concurrent DML is also not permitted while adding an auto-increment column. However we don’t use it and are unlikely to use it in future. So I have made the cell green for now.

Reviewer: I think markdown wouldn't allow for colored tables?

Author: Yeah I looked very slightly into this. You _could_ technically do this in hugo with some custom css, but I didn't bother spending that much effort :stuck_out_tongue:

Reviewer 2: If this is highly desirable, @emdecr may be able to assist.

Author: It will be good to have ;)

Reviewer 3: @agnivade @cwarnermm Sorry I missed this - my notification routing was weird; didn't get pinged on my MM email 😅 

Anywho - Did y'all still want me to take a look at this? Just lemme know. Screencap attached. Was it this entire column that you wanted to colour green?

<img width="869" alt="Screen Shot 2023-05-16 at 10 37 29 AM" src="https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-developer-documentation/assets/10912003/87f20cde-46d6-4771-b526-de4d2340ff22">

Thanks!

Author: @emdecr - Not the entire column, check this [doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1wdQLzS_C6cjJIcyZWEYEeaP3Ej_NuuXj4lDt1VFuyZU/edit#heading=h.xe5arfvo4667). Some cells will be green, red and yellow depending on their value. Basically we need to match whatever is there in the doc.

Let us know if it's doable :)

Author: No rush at all. Feel free to take your time!

To give some context, we have this particular migration `ALTER TABLE posts ALTER COLUMN props TYPE jsonb USING props::jsonb;` which has caused us more pain than it was worth. Several large customers have faced problems with this migration where in some cases, it has been observed to take 8+ hrs. Therefore, we strongly suggest to avoid making any `ALTER COLUMN` changes until absolutely unavoidable (for example, security issues).

However, if you MUST do this, then see the example later.

4. ALTER TABLE DROP COLUMN

**Postgres**: Only metadata lock is taken. No table rewrite takes place. The space is just marked as unused and later taken up by future DB writes.

**MySQL**: Table rewrite happens but no lock is taken.

5. ALTER TABLE ADD CONSTRAINT

**Postgres**: Relatively rare, but out of those 6 cases, 2 are adding unique constraints. For example:

```sql
ALTER TABLE oauthaccessdata ADD CONSTRAINT oauthaccessdata_clientid_userid_key UNIQUE (clientid, userid);
```

This can be improved by first adding the index concurrently, and then attaching the index to the constraint. See example later.

> Adding a foreign key in postgres takes a share row exclusive lock, which means only SELECT queries are allowed. It is possible to bypass the table scanning by adding a “NOT VALID” suffix, but then it defeats the purpose of having a FK. Suggestion would be to avoid doing it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Adding a foreign key in PostgreSQL takes a share row exclusive lock, which means only SELECT queries are allowed. It is possible to bypass the table scanning by adding a “NOT VALID” suffix, but then it defeats the purpose of having a foreign key. We recommend against doing it.
```

**MySQL**:

Adding an unique constraint doesn't take locks, but does a table rebuild.

> Adding an FK takes locks. But avoidable by setting `SET  foreign_key_checks=0`. Then it doesn't take any locks, and neither rebuilds the table. But it partially defeats the purpose of using an FK. Recommend to AVOID.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Adding a foreign key takes locks. But avoidable by setting `SET  foreign_key_checks=0`. Then it doesn't take any locks, and neither rebuilds the table. But it partially defeats the purpose of using an foreign key. We recommend you avoid this.
```

6. DROP INDEX

> **Postgres**: DROP INDEX CONCURRENTLY does not take any locks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**PostgreSQL**: DROP INDEX CONCURRENTLY does not take any locks.
```

UPDATE reactions SET channelid = COALESCE((select channelid from posts where posts.id = reactions.postid), '') WHERE channelid='';
UPDATE threads SET threadteamid = channels.teamid FROM channels WHERE threads.threadteamid IS NULL AND channels.id = threads.channelid;
UPDATE fileinfo SET channelid = posts.channelid FROM posts WHERE fileinfo.channelid IS NULL AND fileinfo.postid = posts.id;
```

We can take the same approach as in data migrations.

9. DELETE

So far, there have been only a handful of DELETE statements in schema migrations. And mostly they have been for security issues. The general recommendation is to avoid running a full-blown DELETE statement that operates on the entire table, but rather operate on batches so as to avoid taking a lock on the entire table. This could either be done in a job since there is no new code waiting for this to be executed. (See above)

## Examples

### How do I change a column type if I MUST

Follow this long-winded procedure:
- Create a new column.
- Migrate existing data.
- From next ESR, start using the new column.

> - Next ESR, drop the old column.

Reviewer: What do you think about helping readers by adding a visual for this? Maybe it can be easier to understand.

Author: Sure, let me add a diagram

For example, let’s say the next upcoming version is 8.4, and the next ESR is 8.6. So step 1 and 2, goes in 8.4. And in 8.7 onwards, we add the code to start using the new column, which will eventually be part of 8.12 (ESR after that). And then from 8.13 onwards, we can drop the column.

The reasoning behind this is some customers will only upgrade from ESR to ESR. So we need to ensure backwards compatibility with the previous version.

Following shows an example where we are adding a channel_count column to the status table. This is not exactly altering a column, but the idea remains the same, and you can extend this to fit your use-case.

1. ALTER TABLE status ADD COLUMN channel_count integer;

> 2. Our next objective is to migrate existing data. We do this in a 2-phase approach where we set up triggers to migrate all new data and in the background migrate old data in batches.

Reviewer: How are we going to be sure the migration is completed with the trigger mechansim? I mean are we thinking of a mechanism to enable admisitrators to follow progress? Also can you elaborate how resilient is this mechanism?

Author: The trigger will only be executed for any new rows or updates. So there is no completion marker there. The completion marker is for the job, which will just add a new row in the Systems table when done. The reliability of that is handled by the jobs infrastructure, which we have been using since the start. The trigger resides in the DB itself, so no issues on that reliability wise.

Reviewer: Oh okay, I missed the job part being handled by the application. Thanks for the clarification 👍

```sql
UPDATE status s SET channel_count=(SELECT count(*) FROM channelmembers cm WHERE cm.userid=s.userid) WHERE channel_count IS NOT NULL AND s.userid in (SELECT userid FROM status WHERE userid > '' ORDER BY userid ASC limit 10);
```

Then store the user id offset in the job metadata.

```sql
UPDATE status s SET channel_count=(SELECT count(*) FROM channelmembers cm WHERE cm.userid=s.userid) WHERE channel_count IS NOT NULL AND s.userid in (SELECT userid FROM status WHERE userid > <offset> ORDER BY userid ASC limit 10);
```

At this point, when the job finishes, the new column would be ready to use. And the triggers would take care of always keeping the data up to date.

3. Now we can start using the new column from the next ESR version. But we cannot yet drop the existing column because of backwards compatibility guarantees. The old column would still be in use by older app nodes in the cluster during upgrade. We also would want to drop the trigger since its use is finished.

```sql
DROP TRIGGER tr_update_status_channel_count on status
```

4. And in the ESR after that, now we can finally drop the old column.

> This deliberately skips renaming the column for simplicity. Depending on your use-case, you can do that if you want to. It is a fast operation that does not rebuild the table in both MySQL and Postgres, so there are no issues.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This deliberately skips renaming the column for simplicity. Depending on your use-case, you can do that if you want to. It is a fast operation that does not rebuild the table in both MySQL and PostgreSQL, so there are no issues.
```

> ### How do I add a unique constraint to a table (postgres only)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### How do I add a unique constraint to a table (PostgreSQL only)
```

    - If it's applied you can revert it using morph CLI command. An example command would look like `morph apply down --driver {your-driver} --dsn "{your-dsn}" --path {path-to-your-driver-specific-migration-files} --number 1`
2. If the migration has been shipped in a release and you want to apply fixes, instead of changing the existing script, you should add a new one so that `db_migrations` will stay consistent. You can edit the existing migration to be a no-op for future releases in this case.

> ### How do I measure the impact of the migration?

Reviewer: I think we should still have some sort of imapct analysis of migration (for the obvious ones) 0/5

Author: The whole idea is actually covered by the earlier sections where we talk about how we avoid non-blocking migrations. So we don't really need to extract the raw SQL anymore. I am trying to keep things simple. But perhaps, we can keep a line on calculating schema migration time. I'll add that as a last step in the previous section.

Reviewer: Yep, a single sentence would be great. We may still want some review/discussion mechanism on any migrations that would happening on large tables.

Author: Yep the line is added now. And yes, we have CODEOWNERS in the migrations directory now. So all and any migration will have to be reviewed by someone from our team. We will discuss any large migration on the PR itself.

Answer the following two questions:
1. Is it a large table (like `Posts` or `ThreadMemberships`)? (The performance team can help you with this.)
2. Can my change run concurrently with other database operations in that table? Check MySQL and PostgreSQL documentation, starting from required minimum versions supported by Mattermost.

If the answer to 2. is yes, then it should be pretty simple. In that case, if the answer to 1 is also yes, then please extract the raw SQL query to be run and add it in the release notes for customers who want to run it in off-hours to speed up upgrade time.

However, If the answer to the second question above is "no", then contact the {{< newtabref href="https://community.mattermost.com/core/channels/developers-performance" title="performance team" >}} to discuss a solution.
## GLOSSARY

> ### Inform SRE team

Reviewer: I think we should still keep this recommendation, just in cae :)

Author: This was initially introduced by the SRE team but is not enforced anymore at the moment. And moreover, we would be stricly following non-blocking migrations and along with Community moving to Postgres, I don't think this is necessary anymore. LMK.

Reviewer: Fair enough, let's remove this section.
